$10,000 Gold?
SAN FRANCISCO – It has never been easy to have a rational conversation about the value of gold.
Lately, with gold prices up more than 300% over the last decade, it is harder than ever.
Just last December, fellow economists Martin Feldstein and Nouriel Roubini each penned op-eds bravely questioning bullish market sentiment, sensibly pointing out gold’s risks.
Wouldn’t you know it?
Since their articles appeared, the price of gold has moved up still further.
Gold prices even hit a record-high $1,300 recently.
Last December, many gold bugs were arguing that the price was inevitably headed for $2,000.
Now, emboldened by continuing appreciation, some are suggesting that gold could be headed even higher than that.
One successful gold investor recently explained to me that stock prices languished for a more than a decade before the Dow Jones index crossed the 1,000 mark in the early 1980’s.
Since then, the index has climbed above 10,000.
Now that gold has crossed the magic $1,000 barrier, why can’t it increase ten-fold, too?
Admittedly, getting to a much higher price for gold is not quite the leap of imagination that it seems.
After adjusting for inflation, today’s price is nowhere near the all-time high of January 1980.
Back then, gold hit $850, or well over $2,000 in today’s dollars.
But January 1980 was arguably a “freak peak” during a period of heightened geo-political instability.
At $1,300, today’s price is probably more than double very long-term, inflation-adjusted, average gold prices.
So what could justify another huge increase in gold prices from here?
One answer, of course, is a complete collapse of the US dollar.
With soaring deficits, and a rudderless fiscal policy, one does wonder whether a populist administration might recklessly turn to the printing press.
And if you are really worried about that, gold might indeed be the most reliable hedge.
Sure, some might argue that inflation-indexed bonds offer a better and more direct inflation hedge than gold.
But gold bugs are right to worry about whether the government will honor its commitments under more extreme circumstances.
In fact, as Carmen Reinhart and I discuss in our recent book on the history of financial crises, This Time is Different, cash-strapped governments will often forcibly convert indexed debt to non-indexed debt, precisely so that its value might be inflated away.
Even the United States abrogated indexation clauses in bond contracts during the Great Depression of the 1930’s. So it can happen anywhere.
Even so, the fact that very high inflation is possible does not make it probable, so one should be cautious in arguing that higher gold prices are being driven by inflation expectations.
Some have argued instead that gold’s long upward march has been partly driven by the development of new financial instruments that make it easier to trade and speculate in gold.
There is probably some slight truth – and also a certain degree of irony – to this argument.
After all, medieval alchemists engaged in what we now consider an absurd search for ways to transform base metals into gold.
Wouldn’t it be paradoxical, then, if financial alchemy could make an ingot of gold worth dramatically more?
In my view, the most powerful argument to justify today’s high price of gold is the dramatic emergence of Asia, Latin America, and the Middle East into the global economy.
As legions of new consumers gain purchasing power, demand inevitably rises, driving up the price of scarce commodities.
At the same time, emerging-market central banks need to accumulate gold reserves, which they still hold in far lower proportion than do rich-country central banks. With the euro looking less appetizing as a diversification play away from the dollar, gold’s appeal has naturally grown.
So, yes, there are solid fundamentals that arguably support today’s higher gold price, although it is far more debatable whether and to what extent they will continue to support higher prices in the future.
Indeed, another critical fundamental factor that has been sustaining high gold prices might prove far more ephemeral than globalization.
Gold prices are extremely sensitive to global interest-rate movements.
After all, gold pays no interest and even costs something to store.
Today, with interest rates near or at record lows in many countries, it is relatively cheap to speculate in gold instead of investing in bonds.
But if real interest rates rise significantly, as well they might someday, gold prices could plummet.
Most economic research suggests that gold prices are very difficult to predict over the short to medium term, with the odds of gains and losses being roughly in balance.
It is therefore dangerous to extrapolate from short-term trends.
Yes, gold has had a great run, but so, too, did worldwide housing prices until a couple of years ago.
If you are a high-net-worth investor, a sovereign wealth fund, or a central bank, it makes perfect sense to hold a modest proportion of your portfolio in gold as a hedge against extreme events.
But, despite gold’s heightened allure in the wake of an extraordinary run-up in its price, it remains a very risky bet for most of us.
Of course, such considerations might have little influence on prices.
What was true for the alchemists of yore remains true today: gold and reason are often difficult to reconcile.
Contact us to secure rights&nbsp;
Your message has been sent successfully, thank you for contacting us. Secure rights Your First name
Your Last name
Your Email
Your Phone
Your Company
Please explain how you intend to use the requested commentary
var RecaptchaOptions = { theme: 'custom', custom_theme_widget: 'flowli_custom_captcha' };	 Incorrect please try again Enter the numbers/words above Enter the numbers you hear Captcha is invalid, generate another one and use it Get another captcha Get an audio captcha Get an image captcha HelpThank you.
You're human.
Cancel
A Conservative Europe
Last week Tony Blair, Jacques Chirac, and Gerhard Schroeder met in Berlin.
They departed pledging to revive Europe's growth.
We've heard that empty promise before.
Instead, the European Union needs a new direction.
I say this as leader of the party which has been at the forefront of Britain's engagement with Europe.
It was a Conservative government that first applied for membership in the early 1960's.
A Conservative government took the United Kingdom into the European Economic Community in 1973.
Margaret Thatcher worked with Jacques Delors to forge the Single Market in 1986.
So I have no doubt that Britain must remain influential within the Union.
But British policy towards the EU has often led to worse rather than better relations among member states.
Faced with a new EU initiative, our traditional response has often been to oppose it, vote against it, lose the vote, then sulkily to adopt it while blaming everyone else.
Many Europeans are sick of British vetoes.
So am I.
Of course there are basic requirements that all member states must accept.
Foremost are the four freedoms of the single market; free movement of goods, services, people and capital.
But a single market does not require a single social or industrial policy, far less a common taxation policy.
Allowing countries to pursue their own policies in these areas encourages competitiveness.
Forcing common standards means that Europe will fall further behind as member states shuffle their costs onto their neighbours.
Which areas should be applied to every member state, and which should be optional?
I believe that every member state should administer those policies that do not directly and significantly affect other member states.
In areas which serve their national interest, individual members should decide whether to retain wholly national control or whether to co‑operate with others.
The Union's members should form a series of overlapping circles: different combinations of members should be able to pool their responsibilities in different areas of their own choosing.
Precedents exist for this.
NATO has been flexible since its inception.
France signed up for membership but later refused to submit her armed forces to NATO's central command.
Similar flexibility exists with the Euro, the Schengen Agreement, and the Social Chapter.
These precedents can be extended.
So far, everyone has had to move forward together, with individual countries negotiating specific opt‑outs.
But since 1998, there has been a procedure within the Treaties - called enhanced co‑operation - that could allow some members to go ahead with further integration in a specific area without involving every other member.
Instead of individual member states having fraught negotiations to opt‑out of a new initiative, those that support it can simply opt‑in.
Countries that want to integrate further can do so.
They don't need to drag Britain and others kicking and screaming in their wake because the others are not compelled to join them.
In this way we can break free of the institutionalised tug of war that has characterised EU relations.
I am not talking about a two‑speed Europe.
That implies that we all agree on the destination and differ only about the speed of the journey.
I don't want to reach the destination that some of our partners may aspire to.
But I don't want to block their way.
There are some who say that this would mean a loss of influence on the part of those countries which choose not to integrate more closely.
But influence is not an end in itself - it is a means to an end.
Britain does not need a seat at the table when decisions on the Euro are taken.
Our economy has not been adversely affected by staying out.
Keeping the pound does not mean that we oppose the Euro, or hope for its failure.
The European Union should stop trying to do everything and concentrate on doing fewer things more effectively.
